New Tutorials on How to Cite Galaxy and Integrate InvenioRDM Repositories with Galaxy (#6420)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/fair/tutorials/inveniordm-integration/tutorial.md

---
layout: tutorial_hands_on
title: Integrating InvenioRDM-compatible Repositories with Galaxy
tags:

>   - fair

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - fair
  - InvenioRDM
```

Reviewer: Not sure if this is a good tag. But I feel like something more descriptive of the tutorial would be nice.

level: Introductory
questions:
  - How to connect InvenioRDM-compatible repositories to Galaxy?
objectives:

>   - Learn how to integrate InvenioRDM repositories in Galaxy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Apply the integration of an InvenioRDM repository in Galaxy
```

[Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/) is an open repository for all scholarship, enabling researchers from all disciplines to share and preserve their research outputs, regardless of size or format. Free to upload and free to access, Zenodo makes scientific outputs of all kinds citable, shareable and discoverable for the long term.

It's worth noting that [Zenodo, in October 2023, migrated to InvenioRDM as its underlying technical platform](https://blog.zenodo.org/2023/10/13/2023-10-13-zenodo-rdm/). This move not only makes this integration fully compatible with Zenodo but also signals a commitment to enhanced features and scalability, further bolstering the integration's potential benefits for researchers.

# Getting started

For testing purposes, you can use the [Zenodo sandbox instance](https://sandbox.zenodo.org/) to explore the functionality of the plugin.

## Setting up your PAT (Personal Access Token)

To be able to upload files and browse protected records, you need to create an account and set up your PAT (Personal Access Token). In this case, in the Zenodo sandbox instance. To create a new token:

> <hands-on-title>Create Your Personal Access Token</hands-on-title>
> 

> > 1. Go to your `user settings` and select the `Applications` tab.

Reviewer: Would you start here directly from the Sandbox? Maybe the first step should be:
1. Open [Zenodo](link) and Log in or create an account

Author: I have added the step to log in to Zenodo and added a comment box noting that the access token can only be viewed/copied when first created so it should be copied and securely stored at this time and that a new token will need to be created if the previously created token is lost.

>
> 2. Then, click on `New token` and give it a name and the necessary permissions.
>
>    ![Zenodo PAT](../../images/zenodo-pat.png)
{: .hands_on}

## How to integrate InvenioRDM repositories in Galaxy 25.0

The new `Manage Your Remote File Sources` section is available under `User → Preferences`. We will integrate the Zenodo Sandbox instance for demonstration purposes, but you can also configure your institution's InvenioRDM instance. Here’s how it works:

> <hands-on-title>Integration in Galaxy</hands-on-title>
> 
> 1. Navigate to `User → Preferences → Manage Your Remote File Sources`. If you haven't set up any integrations yet, you'll see an empty list.
> ![Manage Your Remote File Sources](../../images/1-empty-file-sources-list.png)
>
> 2. Click `+ Create` to configure a new integration. You'll see a list of available integrations, including `S3, Dropbox, InvenioRDM, Zenodo`, and more (depending on your Galaxy server).
> ![Create New Integration](../../images/2-create-new.png)
> 

> > 3. Select `InvenioRDM` to configure it and enter your **credentials or relevant connection details**.

Reviewer: Maybe add that the token is the one created in the last step if the sandbox is used.

Author: Done

> ![Configure InvenioRDM](../../images/3-invenio-template-filled.png)
> 
> 4. Once set up, your InvenioRDM integration, in this case, `My Zenodo Sandbox`, will appear in the list where you can manage or delete it.
> ![InvenioRDM Integration](../../images/4-instance-created.png)
> 

> > 5. Your selected integrations will appear first when browsing import/export locations. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 5. Your selected integrations will appear first when browsing import/export locations. You can find them by clicking on the `Upload` button in the activity bar.
```

> ![Browse Remote Files](../../images/5-upload-import.png)
{: .hands_on}

> <comment-title></comment-title>
> If you want to integrate the "real" Zenodo instance, we recommend using the Zenodo integration instead of InvenioRDM. This will improve the integration further by making it more prominent in some parts of the Galaxy interface.
>
{: .comment}

> <details-title>Do you want to add a different repository to Galaxy?</details-title>
> 
> There are a number of additional repository types that you can connect to Galaxy and use to importing and exporting data.
>
> {% snippet faqs/galaxy/manage_your_repositories.md %}
>
{: .details}

# Importing records and files into Galaxy

> Once you have integrated an InvenioRDM respository into Galaxy, you will be able to import records and files stored in the remote repository into Galaxy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have integrated an InvenioRDM repository into Galaxy, you will be able to import records and files stored in the remote repository into Galaxy.
```

> <hands-on-title>Importing Files</hands-on-title>
> 

> > 1. From the Upload tool, you can select `Choose remote files`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 1. Open the Upload tool, and select `Choose remote files`
```

> ![Upload Tool](../../images/upload-tool.png)
>
> 2. Search for the Zenodo sandbox instance. Remember that this will only appear if the InvenioRDM plugin is configured to connect to the Zenodo sandbox in your Galaxy instance.
> ![Choose Remote Files](../../images/choose-remote-files.png)
{: .hands_on}

Once you have selected the Zenodo sandbox instance, you can browse public records and import them into your Galaxy history. You can choose to import the full record or individual files in the same way you would import files from any other remote source.

# Exporting your Galaxy history

You can export your history directly to Zenodo. A benefit of publishing your history on Zenodo is that Zenodo will generate a DOI for your history. You can then include this DOI in your publication and it can be used by other researchers to cite your work.

> <hands-on-title>Exporting a History</hands-on-title>
> 

> > 1. From the history menu, you can select `Export History to File`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 1. From the history menu {% icon galaxy-history-options %}
, you can select `Export History to File`
```

[Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/) is an open repository for all scholarship, enabling researchers from all disciplines to share and preserve their research outputs, regardless of size or format. Free to upload and free to access, Zenodo makes scientific outputs of all kinds citable, shareable and discoverable for the long term.

It's worth noting that [Zenodo, in October 2023, migrated to InvenioRDM as its underlying technical platform](https://blog.zenodo.org/2023/10/13/2023-10-13-zenodo-rdm/). This move not only makes this integration fully compatible with Zenodo but also signals a commitment to enhanced features and scalability, further bolstering the integration's potential benefits for researchers.

# Getting started

For testing purposes, you can use the [Zenodo sandbox instance](https://sandbox.zenodo.org/) to explore the functionality of the plugin.

## Setting up your PAT (Personal Access Token)

To be able to upload files and browse protected records, you need to create an account and set up your PAT (Personal Access Token). In this case, in the Zenodo sandbox instance. To create a new token:

> <hands-on-title>Create Your Personal Access Token</hands-on-title>
>

> > 1. Open [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org) and `Log in` or create an account.

Author: Thank you for catching that I was using the wrong link here. I have corrected this. 

I have also added a comment to the end of this hands-on box clarifying that after logging in to the chosen repository service that uses InvenioRDM, users will be able to follow steps 2 and 3 to create an access token. The process to create a token will be the same as for Zenodo/Zenodo sandbox instance because InvenioRDM is the technical platform used by Zenodo and the sandbox instance.

> ![Create New Integration](../../images/2-create-new.png)
> 
> 3. Select `InvenioRDM` to configure it and enter your **credentials or relevant connection details**. (This will be the access token created in the previous section if using the Zenodo sandbox.)
> ![Configure InvenioRDM](../../images/3-invenio-template-filled.png)
> 
> 4. Once set up, your InvenioRDM integration, in this case, `My Zenodo Sandbox`, will appear in the list where you can manage or delete it.
> ![InvenioRDM Integration](../../images/4-instance-created.png)
> 
> 5. Your selected integrations will appear first when browsing import/export locations. You can find them by clicking on the `Upload` button in the activity bar.
> ![Browse Remote Files](../../images/5-upload-import.png)
{: .hands_on}

> <comment-title></comment-title>
> We are using the Zenodo Sandbox for demonstration purposes. If you want to integrate the "real" Zenodo instance, we recommend using the Zenodo integration instead of InvenioRDM, already in the `+ Create` Galaxy integration step. This will improve the integration further by making it more prominent in some parts of the Galaxy interface.
>

> {: .comment}

Reviewer 2: Thank you @tflowers15!
Having two versions should be completely fine. The intent of talking about InvenioRDM and not only focusing on Zenodo is that some institutions may have "their own version of Zenodo" that can be integrated using the generic InvenioRDM template. But having a Zenodo-centric tutorial makes sense.
I lack the "user perspective", but let me know if I can help with anything.

> {: .comment}

Author: @davelopez Great, thanks. I think it should be straight forward to make the Zenodo version, but I will let you know once I have added it.

@hexylena Those are much clearer titles, I'll go with "Uploading Data to Zenodo from Galaxy". 

On your last point about how we use screenshots from the zenodo sandbox for Invenio tutorial. My understanding of Invenio is that it is the underlying application/software that many repository services (including Zenodo) are built on. So although there is no generic Invenio repository that we can connect to, any repository service that uses Invenio will have the same basic interface features and the method of creating an access token will be the same. 

However Invenio does have an Invenio sandbox instance, [https://inveniordm.web.cern.ch/](https://inveniordm.web.cern.ch/), for demonstration of Invenio's functionality, which I tested to confirm that the access token is created in the same way as on Zenodo. I do not think any real repository service that uses Invenio will be branded as Invenio. The Invenio software website FAQ page lists several repository services that use Invenio [https://inveniosoftware.org/products/rdm/#status](https://inveniosoftware.org/products/rdm/#status).

> {: .comment}

Author: I have created and included the new "Uploading Data to Zenodo from Galaxy" tutorial in this pull request.
